---
layout: post
title: Carbon Dioxide and Global Warming
subtitle: Debunking the alarmist approach
headline: This is one of the cases where misinformation has become so publicised and popular that people vote with their eyes closed. Politicians will forever attempt to enter our good graces -- especially when it comes to shackling us through an excuse everyone contends for. Please, read this and get a little more informed, and let us stop confusing propaganda with reality.
hero-image: https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/originals/68/46/66/68466636992bd3d59637e399a1b7a727.jpg
image-by: <a href='https://www.flickr.com/photos/lautturi/6143907266/in/photolist-amV8zC-fu58j-r8jbr-emCcN-M6yV4-qgcev-e6JM3x-zYnGR-M1bwb-czsfnj-e6Qqj9-kABwKf-2HWL7M-pANCTc-yD8tn-n7hPZA-2JgMp3-4rcBt3-dw75M7-7D7Thx-jaXsJ-26vgMY-9H7NfN-M6Avn-2Az1jV-bv1pkF-EUsNo-M6znD-9fjgvX-2VNEG2-9ovrJi-nKF248-bsSoF-ciexpJ-3vvbD-6Cuk1f-LAMjk-q8XZXn-e6Qr6f-oXmfcG-6nrDwV-e6JMPp-dgyM3g-e6JLXn-e6JLR8-qa2ZA5-e6JMLn-e6JMvM-ssxw3Q-e6QqSh' target='_new'>Factory</a> by <a href='https://www.flickr.com/photos/lautturi/' target='_new' >Jesse Saira</a> under <a href='https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/' target='_new'>Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 2.0 Generic</a>
ref: carbondioxidedebunk
categories: blog
lang: en
tags: carbonDioxide debunk alarmist Liberal Green environment essay
---
This is a reprint from an article in <cite><em>Chemistry, Precision and Design, Third Edition</em>, by A Beka Book; Pensacola</cite> pages 325-326.

For ease of reading, I have abridged this essay and set important points <strong>in bold.</strong> I've included a short video of this subject at the end of this article, so be sure to scroll down!

<blockquote>[...] Several atmospheric gases are responsible for the greenhouse effect. <strong>Between 94% and 98% of the warming effect is due to ordinary <em>water vapor</em></strong> (H<sub>2</sub>O). Next in importance are <em>carbon dioxide (CO</em><sub>2</sub>), produced by living things and by the burning of carbon-containing substances, and <em>methane</em> (CH<sub>4</sub>), produced by vegetation and ruminant animals. Several other trace gases also play a role.</blockquote>

<blockquote><em>Global warming.</em> Some scientists have speculated that mankind's production of CO<sub>2</sub> (from fossil fuel combustion, agriculture, and cement manufacturing) may significantly enhance the greenhouse effect, causing average global temperatures to rise. <strong>Although man's annual contribution of CO<sub>2</sub> to the environment is far smaller than nature's (roughly 29 billion tons vs. 850 billion tons), these scientists worry that this small increase may cause unpredictable changes in the global climate. Environmental activists have gone much further, predicting global flooding, disease epidemics, mass famine, and even the extinction of the human race if drastic action is not taken to slash CO<sub>2</sub> emissions.</strong></blockquote>

<blockquote><em>Earth's climate history. </em>Actually, mankind's effects on the global climate are probably far smaller than some would like to think. Although the earth's climate is not well understood, the science of climatology has shown that <em>the earth's climate tends to fluctuate over long-term cycles.</em> For example, <strong>between A.D. 900 and A.D. 1100, a period climatologists call the <em>Medieval Climate Optimum</em> or <em>Medieval Warm Period, </em>global temperatures are thought to have been significantly warmer than at present.</strong> The weather was so mild that grapes and citrus fruits were grown in England; the Vikings established successful farms and colonies in Greenland; and the Anasazi Indians built a large agriculture-based civilization on the Colorado Plateau (which was then characterized by a warm, moist climate). <strong>By the 1300s, however, global temperatures dropped sharply, plunging the world into a period called the <em>Little Ice Age.</em></strong> The Vikings' crops and livestock in Greenland began to fail, the colonists died, and the island became covered with ice. Widespread exhaustion and malnutrition due to poor weather and crop failures left Europe vulnerable to huge plague epidemics that killed millions of people. Cooler, drier weather on the Colorado Plateau spelled the end of the Anasazi civilization in America, while at the same time the Thames River near London froze over in the winter with ice thick enough to support annual "ice fairs." In the years to come, the unusually cold winters would cause great hardship for early American colonists. <strong>About 1850, the climate began to warm once again, gradually ending the Little Ice Age;</strong> by the early 20th century, citrus fruits were being grown in the United States as far north as the Carolinas. This warming continued until 1938 or so, when temperatures leveled off and began to drop once again (probably related to a decline in solar output). <strong>As late as the 1970s, unusually cold winters prompted environmental activists to call for drastic government action to save the planet from "global cooling" and an imminent Ice Age.</strong> In the late 1980s and 1990s, temperatures once again began to climb (corresponding to an increase in solar output), prompting renewed calls to save the planet -- this time from global warming.</blockquote>

<blockquote>[...] <em>Possible benefits of rising CO<sub>2</sub>. </em>Many environmentalists consider the Kyoto Protocol insufficient for combating the perceived that of global warming, instead calling for redistribution of wealth to developing nations; mandatory population control; and surrender of national sovereignty to the United Nations. Such extreme measures are particularly ironic in light of the fact that <strong>increased CO<sub>2</sub> levels (and even global warming, should it occur) would likely be a net benefit to mankind.</strong> Plants grow much more efficiently at higher CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations; <strong>if the CO<sub>2</sub> content of the air is experimentally doubled, crop yields increase up to 50% while requiring much less water and fertilizer.</strong> Also, history reveals that periods of warmer average global temperatures tend to be associated with better living conditions for humanity as a whole. During the Medieval Climate Optimum (when average global temperatures were several degrees warmer than at present), average life expectancies increased significantly due to reduced disease, higher crop yields, and better nutrition. The global cooling that ended this period (the Little Ice Age), by contrast, was associated with a 10-6ear drop in average life expectancies. [...]</blockquote>

Neat huh? And quite shocking, too. To see how people fudge history to meet their bias is quite educative. Now let me offer one last selection to cap this all off:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WDWEjSDYfxc